---
title: "Beneficial Plant Microbe Interactions"
image: 
  path: /images/misc.jpg
  thumbnail: /images/misc.jpg
  caption: ""
---

## "Have you ever wondered about life on a leaf?" 

Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center (GLBRC) researcher Ashley Shade asks a simple question, but it's one well worth investigation.

The aboveground part of plants where microbes reside, or the phyllosphere, represents the largest environmental surface area on the plant. Much of this area is grown as cultivated agriculture, and understanding the interactions between plants and the microorganisms that live on their surfaces may help us develop agricultural management practices that can increase crop productivity and resilience.

Perennial plants like switchgrass and miscanthus are a crucial target for the sustainable development of biofuels. In addition to yielding large amounts of biomass that can be converted into biofuels and bioproducts, perennial crops offer a broad range of ecosystem services that support efforts to mitigate climate change, such as sequestering greenhouse gases and driving nutrient cycling in the soil.

Like all plants, perennials are home to a wide variety of microbes, and many of these microbes beneﬁt their hosts. For example, some plant-associated microbes can increase the plant's productivity and offer some protection against environmental stressors like heat and drought. Because of this, management of the plant microbiome is one tool proposed to promote crop growth and resilience, which is particularly important in the face of global climate change. Along with selective breeding and data-informed ﬁeld practices, microbiome management is expected to be instrumental in the sustainable production of biofuel feedstocks.

We are exploring which microbes and how can we add them to perennials to improve plant growth and sustainable agriculture.

## Collaborators
Ashley Shade, University of Lyon and GLBRC
DOE Inter-BRC


## Funding

This project is funded by the DOE and is part of the Center for Advanced Bioenergy and Bioproducts Innovation.

