---
title: "Microbial drivers of soil health in bioenergy crops"
image: 
  path: /images/cobs.jpg
  thumbnail: /images/cobs.jpg
  caption: ""
---

How can microbes help us achieve sustainable agricultural productivity?

Bioenergy crops are crops grown specifically for the purpose of converting biomass or compartments of plants into biofuels or bioproducts. These crops are part of our plan to meet our energy demands of the future, but we need to learn to grow these crops in new ways. For example, we want to grow these crops in 'marginal' lands that may not have as much water or nutrients as traditional food crops.  We also want to be thoughtful of 'how' we grow these crops, ensuring that they efficiently provide biomass while not impairing soil or water quality in their production.

Generally, plants and microbes form symbiotic associations, and these relationships often benefit the plant host. These functions can include tolerance to stress, such as drought, or making nutrients and resources more available to the plant.  The benefits that microbiomes can provide to plants and specifically for bionergy crops is a large part of our research program.  We want to understand how microbes are involved in nutrient cycling and losses, plant protection and resilience, and the impacts of management on the plant-microbe system.

We hope to improve understanding of the underlying mechanisms governing the plant-soil-microbe
interactions that explain key feedstock traits, such as yield, effects on soil carbon storage, and water and
nitrogen use efficiencies.  This information will help us to predict the sustainability of different feedstocks and inform the economic viability and environmental outcomes associated with the production of different biofuels and
bioproducts. 

## Collaborators
Emily Heaton, ISU
Andrew Vanloocke, ISU

## Funding

This project is funded by the DOE and is part of the Center for Advanced Bioenergy and Bioproducts Innovation.


